Welcome, Heather.
We have 10 minutes with you this morning,
and that includes time for questions. We'll hand it over to you now.
Cool. Thank you very much, and thank you for the opportunity.
And also thank you to your support staff who've given me a time that works with
some accessibility needs I have.
I'm speaking on behalf of Just Kai.
We're a Kiwi organization that
seeks to raise awareness of modern slavery and to identify and
promote food products with slavery supply chains.
And I'm really delighted that we've got to this point with the Modern Slavery Bill.
I first spoke to my MP back in 2019 saying that it'd be really helpful if New
Zealand had this kind of legislation, and it's just amazing that
we've got to this point.
Currently, I find that there's an awful lot of confusion in this area.
For example, not that long ago, I spoke to an ice cream company that has a $50
million turnover and asked about slavery in the supply chain of their
sugar, which is a high-risk product.
And they simply said that they source from a large New Zealand supplier,
so of course they'll be fine.
And I come across that a lot, medium-sized players just assuming the big
players must be doing the right thing.
And it's really hard to even work out if that's true.
In that particular case,
I contacted the supplier. They told me they were slave-free.
Everyone always tells me they're slave-free.
But they actually voluntarily gave me their reasons,
which on the one hand was unconvincing, and
I'm not recommending them, but on the other hand,
was really useful. And that's the kind of thing that this legislation makes
available. It makes available the sorts of information that
you can then make assessments based on.
And I feel like that would've been really helpful for me if there was such a report
around, and that is a company that's big enough that they would be needing
to report under this legislation.
It would also be handy for the company, the small company that I talked about,
because there's a thing that they can look at rather than just making assumptions.
In the work that we do identifying products
with slave-free supply chains, we make really extensive use of modern
slavery statements
from particularly California and the UK, and more recently Australia.
A lot of the high-risk products for slavery do
have consumer-facing certifications that we can point to the public to
look for, but a lot of our work is on fish.
Fish is really high risk for slavery,
and there's nothing consumers can look for.
It's a matter of talking to brands and companies and finding out what they're
doing.
And just a couple of examples,
there's a company called Hartz that has a bunch of pet food brands in New
Zealand, pretty sure all of which have fish in them.
And on their modern slavery statement, they talk about their auditing process for
their suppliers, and it's just really useful having that information.
Even if they don't have that kind of information, there's another
company that's the parent brand of the Hill's pet food.
Again, pet food has so much fish in it. It's kind of bizarre.
But the parent company of Hill's kind of said that they had
75% of their spend in high-risk geographies
is audited, and so then I can talk to them, and they do many
things other than pet food, but I can then ask, "Is the pet food included in that?"
It gives you information that you can work with, even if the information isn't
quite what you need.
But also for those reports to be useful, I said
in my submission that it would be really helpful if there was a requirement
for the companies when they report to talk about known
risks and actually what they're doing about them.
I've read a number of reports from overseas where they just basically say,
"Hey, there's no risk of slavery in our supply chain, so we don't need to do
anything." And I'm like, "You're buying cotton from Xinjiang.
You're buying tomatoes from Australia.
How can you not know that there's risk in your supply chain?" But they don't have
to know.
And
for that kind of thing, I myself make a lot of use of the US Department of Labor
list of goods produced by child labor and forced labor.
Who knows how long that list will keep on being produced, but if it is, that's the
kind of thing people need to be looking at rather than just making assumptions.
And that means the statements are much more meaningful.
It'd be helpful for the ice cream company that I talked about.
I also would hope that having realistic knowledge about these
risks would
make that knowledge
trickle down to smaller companies.
Just this past week I was talking to a tea company that do spiced chai
teas,
and it was just really clear they had no idea about
what the risks were in their supply chain.
They said they were doing excellent things. They were doing almost nothing.
And I think they were in total good faith. They just didn't understand.
And also hopefully also make the knowledge trickle down to consumers
as well, who currently I find are
almost always really keen to do something when they know about these sorts
of issues, but have no idea what's going on or how to tell or how to assess what
companies say. So that was all I had to say,
if there are any questions.
Thank you very much.
I do appreciate that. It doesn't appear that we have any questions from the
committee, but that doesn't
reflect the lack of interest. It's just a very comprehensive
submission. Oh, we do have one from Camilla. Oh.
Just very quickly, Heather, I just wanted to know, who was your MP that you
visited in 2019?
Debra Russell.
Oh, right. Okay.
Yeah, from Helen.
Well, you'll be pleased to know that she supported this bill coming through.
Yes, for sure.
And she's very personally supportive as well, so I'll make sure I pass that on.
Cool. Thank you. Great. Thanks so much, Heather.
We appreciate it, both your written and your oral submission.
Cool. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
We'll move on now to Selwyn
ColesSelwyn,
hopefully, there we go. Look at that. Very efficient.
Selwyn, we have you
for five minutes. That includes time for questions if there are from the
committee. We'll hand over to you now.
Kia ora koutou. Thank you for the opportunity to talk.
And also, Camilla, I saw you there.
Thank you in particular for all your work in this space. So I'm Selwyn.
I'm an academic at AUT, but doing this in my private
capacity.
My basic contention
is this, that first
there are serious challenges in terms of enacting
effective modern slavery legislation in Aotearoa, and that we need to be honest
about those.
The thesis which I did my master's on was kind of tracking
those challenges and then trying to understand those better.
But, at the same time, there are good enough reasons
to enact something like this bill,
and then in particular, to bring a laser focus to the statutory
review
in three years. So just to kind of start with the challenges.
So, my view remains that there are real and often underappreciated
challenges in terms of getting a scheme like this working effectively.
In particular, if our goal is to make it ensure it makes a difference to the
lives and the working conditions of exploited workers.
So three that we could kind of focus on.
So first, in terms of ensuring that we translate disclosure into due
diligence.
So the theory is that disclosure will create reputational pressures on entities to
up their game.
I think with New Zealand's comparatively small civil society,
it can make it hard for disclosures to be meaningfully scrutinized.
And add to that the current kind of political skepticism about corporate
disclosures, there's a risk that the regime
generates
kind of flashy reports and struggles to move into due diligence.
A second challenge is around translating transparency into leverage.
So even once entities become aware of the inevitable modern slavery
risks and their supply chains, there's a serious question which remains about
what we expect entities to do with it.
In particular, the challenge that even many of our biggest commercial entities
often have minimal influence, particularly over their global supply chains.
The third kind of related challenge is this risk that
entities
who realize they have risks but struggle on the leverage side
will be tempted to cut and run,
to drop risky suppliers which can, in many cases,
worsen the lives of exploited workers.
So I did note a few recommendations that particularly respond to those challenges.
For instance, around more selective targeted reporting, backed up by the
capacity-building efforts from a modern slavery commissioner.
Including more specific language, potentially around collective leverage,
responsible engagement,
and perhaps more clearly delineating, at least in the implementation
guidance between domestic and international exploitation.
However, despite all this,
yeah, Camilla, yeah, go for it.
Sorry, I was just wanting to get the first question in when you're finished.
No.
Have you finished now?
I'll wrap up quickly, and then I'll go to-
Yeah, go for it. We usually have questions at the end-
Cool. Sorry
... Selwyn, otherwise you'll never get back to your point.
Cool.
I would want to say that despite all these challenges,
I would really not want us to get caught up in the weeds,
and to decide not to progress as we have many times before.
So just to wrap up with kind of a couple of encouragements.
The first is to be honest about those challenges, and in particular, in the way
that the commission kind of reasons through the submissions and writes its
report to be as precise as possible about how we're
defining the problem and how we think this law will make a difference.
But second, not to squander the precious bipartisan support
this has, and instead to distinguish between short and medium-term
objectives.
So I do think the bill is more than good enough for now.
It brings regulatory alignment with Australia, meets expectations under our trade
agreements,
and starts the process of shifting norms across the New Zealand market.
I do think in the medium term, there are big challenges to address,
but that these only can be resolved in
practice rather than in theory. So I think only after three years
of real-life experience implementing the law will we be able
to meaningfully review and then improve on its effectiveness, which is why I think
the statutory review is so important. I'll leave it there, and then any questions.
Thank you.
Great, Selwyn. Thank you very much. So we have a question from Camilla Belich.
Thanks, Selwyn. Thank you very much for your submission and for your engagement on
this. I just wanted to,
just because you've mentioned in your submission the
Modern Slavery Commissioner-
Yeah
... and I just wanted to, because this is an idea that
obviously other jurisdictions have looked at, and I just wanted to kind of get from
your perspective. When I kind of proposed this in an earlier draft of the bill,
there was a bit of criticism as to-
Mm
... why do we need a separate reporting entity?
And so just because you are supportive of this, I just wondered if you
could respond to those people, in terms of why you think it's a
beneficial thing and why you've advocated for us to kind of include that or
strengthen that.
I think, in particular, with a small New Zealand market, we
need some kind of entity which is specifically
helping entities to move from creating reports
to feeling the external and internal pressures
to actually do due diligence. Otherwise, the risk is that we just get lots of
flashy reports.
But we need a commissioner who is ensuring there's meaningful accountability for
that, but that is also matched by
targeted
capacity-building efforts.
I think without a commissioner,
it'll be a lot harder to actually ensure
that entities are lifting their game meaningfully on human rights due diligence.
Yeah, in particular, I don't think New Zealand, compared to other jurisdictions,
hasPerhaps a big enough civil society to
ensure that disclosures are meaningfully
scrutinized and that companies are held accountable.
Yeah.
Thank you, Selwyn. Really appreciate your submission,
both orally and written. Thank you for your time.
Good luck.
And we'd like to thank the submitter. Thanks.
Next, we have Save the Children. I don't have the names
of who we've got, so hopefully you will make yourself known to
us.
Jacqui Sowry, lovely. Welcome. We have 10 minutes with you this morning, that
includes time for questions from the committee.
We'll take that your submission is read and please
highlight what you'd like us to be across.
Thank you. Kia ora. Tēnā koutou katoa.
Ko Jacqui Sowry toku ingoa. No Wairarapa ahau.
Child Rights Advocacy and Research Director for Save the Children New Zealand.
Thank you for the opportunity to present our oral submission on the Modern Slavery
Bill. Save the Children was founded in 1919 and is the world leading
independent organization for child rights and children.
We work in 120 countries to save and improve the lives of children around the
world, including here in New Zealand, where we were founded in 1947.
We work to combat modern slavery globally with a focus on eliminating child
labor, child marriage, children in domestic servitude or bonded labor,
and the sexual exploitation of children.
Save the Children supports the Modern Slavery Bill.
We acknowledge the government's commitment and cross-party support to introduce
legislation to strengthen the ability to combat the harmful and illegal
practices of modern slavery in law.
Modern slavery is a global issue and needs to be eliminated.
It is the view of Save the Children that the bill is essential to enable New
Zealand to meaningfully tackle this issue.
The implementation of this bill would further advance New Zealand's
commitment to eliminating modern slavery, including forced labor,
child labor, people smuggling and trafficking.
While many people often think of slavery in historical terms, it is shocking that
27.6 million people, men, women and children,
are deemed to be currently in forced labor.
Additionally, 63% of forced labor happens in the private economy
and generates a $236 billion profit, and it is
happening across the world. And it is shocking to have it acknowledged it's
happening here in Aotearoa, New Zealand, where it's estimated to impact more than
8,000 people.
Save the Children recommends that children are acknowledged as victims of
and/or vulnerable to modern slavery.
Recognizing and responding to the impact of modern slavery on the rights and
well-being of children is essential if we are to eliminate modern slavery.
Modern slavery is a crime and impacts children across the world.
Children who are victims of forced marriage, servitude, trafficking of persons and
exploitation, including sexual exploitation, are known to suffer
physical, mental and emotional abuse and harm.
They are prevented from enjoying their rights to a childhood under the Convention
on the Rights of the Child,
and they are prevented from being protected from all forms of
violence, protected from exploitation, prevented from
accessing their rights to education, to play, to join in groups, and to have a
decent standard of living to ensure that they all grow up and be healthy,
educated, protected and included.
Governments, including the New Zealand Government, have the responsibility and have
signed up to ensure the rights of all children in Aotearoa, New Zealand are
understood, respected and upheld.
Although child labor and exploitation may not have had the same prevalence in
New Zealand as in other countries, it does happen, and cases have been prosecuted
in our courts. It is critically important that children are recognized as
being impacted by and victims of modern slavery, and that the bill directly
recognizes children and makes provisions to support children who are
victims of modern slavery. In regard to the bill, we make three
recommendations. Provisions should be made in the legislation to recognize and make
provisions for children who are victims of modern slavery to ensure their
protection, recovery and rehabilitation.
Resourcing is allocated to ensure that victim support and recovery can be
effectively implemented, and the establishment of a specialist personal
body such as the Independent Anti-Slavery Commissioner, who will include a strong
focus on children within their broader mandate of effectively
combating modern slavery. That concludes our submission, and I'm happy
to take any questions.
Wonderful. Thank you. Just a quick question.
You mentioned the forced marriage aspect.
Mm-hmm.
We had heard from another submitter about that.
Do you feel that, because obviously, in this particular case,
and I know that the members are open-minded, it's sort of a focus on
corporate-
Mm-hmm
... perspective. Where do you see that sitting in this?
It's sort of slightly different and difficult to manage.
What are your thoughts?
I think that's part of the broader scope of eliminating modern slavery.
And sometimes there are connections in a corporate aspect when there is payments
and transactions to marriage taking place.
So it's not completely a separate issue.
I think people understanding the broader aspects of modern slavery
are critical that they include children often.
We're part of discussions around the National Action Plan
that the government is leading at the moment to prevent the trafficking of persons.
Often children are hidden within those discussions.
It's really focused primarily at the labor
issue, and we see that through people coming to New Zealand
seeking employment and they're being falsely lured here, or their employment
is not there and they're paying for jobs that don't exist.
So that is better understood than the implications that impact children
who might be being brought into the New Zealand through adoption
laws or
through
seemingly holiday visits and end up being
part of servitude or forced labor in some form.
And because New Zealand doesn't have a minimum age of work, and there
are reasons for that, being in school as a primary protection
toEnsuring children are not working.
We still need to recognize that as a loophole.
So if a child is not in school, not enrolled, and therefore not visible,
they've got greater vulnerabilities to the issue of modern slavery
and forced labor.
Thank you. Thanks. A question from Camilla Belich.
Thank you. And thanks for the work that you do and for your submission and for
supporting this bill. In terms of
child labor and child exploitation, it's obviously a
really serious issue, and I know, I think almost half of the people
involved in modern slavery are children, which is really concerning.
What does that look like to you in terms of on a practical
level? We've just had some questions around
the definitions of child exploitation and child labor and
just wanting to get your perspective as someone who's worked in that area of
what that looks like.
Well, I think there are some strong existing definitions.
So labor that is harmful, prevents children from having a
childhood, prevents them from those protections under the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. Often, I guess
reasoning is given that we don't have a minimum age of labor because children do a
paper run. But when we really look at the definitions of forced
labor or child labor, they're quite different.
A child doing an after-school paper run on their bike or walking,
they're still at school, they still have friends, they still play, they still
access healthcare. Their childhood is not being damaged or harmed.
It's an addition to their
part of life as a child, whereas a child of forced labor is unable to go to
school, barely able to go to school, is prevented from having friends and
playing. And that's what we see
internationally when we're working on this, that absence of childhood, that
children are not playing, that they're not joining in with their friends.
That if they do get to go to school, it's that absolute minimum, and they're
leaving early. And so a lot of the work we do is to ensure that children
and supporting families to ensure that their children can go to school, and
sometimes that means that we're providing economic supports to
families who can then send their child to school, rather than
having them at home working on farms or weaving carpets or whatever it may be.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Thank you, Jackie.
Really appreciate your participation in the process and the written submission as
well. Very
comprehensive.
And we appreciate it, your time. We'll move on now to our next submitter.
Next, we have Peter McKenzie-Bridle.
Hopefully. There we go. Look at that.
Peter, we have five minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions, and we'll hand over to you now.
Thank you. And look, I appreciate the opportunity to present to the Select
Committee on this important bill.
I trust you've had the chance to read through my written
submissions, so I don't intend to read those to you or to
repeat those.
However, I just want to
summarize the key points of those before I wanted to take the
opportunity to answer questions and to respond to some points that have been raised
by other submitters that I've read through their written submissions.
The key points
of my submission are to emphasize the importance of due diligence,
and that due diligence is an obligation
that needs to be imposed upon reporting entities in this bill.
The absence of an obligation to undertake due
diligence, in my submission, is a
serious omission in the bill.
There is a very good definition of due diligence.
Due diligence is an important aspect to ensuring that
the scourge of
modern slavery is removed from our supply chains.
But the reporting only on
activities that have
been undertaken to
achieve that objective,
the experience that I've been able to review in
other jurisdictions is that reporting only does not achieve
that objective. That reporting is merely, and this is a risk
for the New Zealand regime, a box-ticking exercise
that becomes akin to greenwashing, where the
actual substance of the issue is not
affected by the reporting regime.
There might be comfort at one level that there's visibility on these
important issues and that those
issues are being addressed. But actually on the ground, there's not really a
material effect or a change that's occurring.
So in my view, it's really important, it's essential
actually, that due diligence is an obligation that's imposed on reporting entities,
that they actually undertake and complete due diligence.
That would be strengthened, supported also by strengthening the role of the
commissioner. The bill at the moment proposes a commissioner,
says a commissioner may be appointed,
and that is inadequate, in my submission.
That the commissioner's role is a really
important corollary to the other obligations that would be imposed in the
bill to ensure that
the steps that are required to remove slavery from supply chains actually
occur.
And then thirdly,
in promoting
the ability of civil society organizations
to bring about accountability for
reporting entities to
ensure that those obligations are being upheld.
Some members may have a concern about that, but
there's a
good example of how
a similar level of accountability occurs in health and safety at work
area, where private prosecutions can be brought in respect of health and safety at
work breaches.
The WorkSafe can bring
proceedings against a potential or alleged
breacher-... is
itself, but there's an ability in those extreme
examples,
or really clearly merit-worthy examples where
an individual who has an interest, a legitimate interest in, or an
organization, sorry, that has a legitimate interest in the objective of the bill
can then pursue that accountability through the courts with leave of the
court to be able to do that.
So those are the principal points in my
submissions.
In terms of
other submitters,
I was particularly concerned by the Commonwealth Bank of Australia's
suggestion that New Zealand aligns with the Australian regime.
The Australian regime is problematic.
The
Australian regime, and I've indicated this in my
submission, was roundly criticized shortly after it was brought in for having
only a reporting-only regime, which is what New Zealand is proposing to
do.
That regime was reviewed in 2023
by Professor John McMillan, and
that lack of enforceability around reporting
obligations was a serious omission in the Australian regime
that Professor McMillan had identified, and that's the risk I believe that New
Zealand is facing here with this bill is that without
a
enforceable obligation,
the regime would be as ineffective as the Australian regime
has been in dealing with those issues.
Fletcher Building also has submitted that New Zealand should align with
broader international developments, including in the UK and the European Union.
That is something I think that the committee should certainly
endorse. But those jurisdictions are actually strengthening and
extending due diligence obligations, not weakening them.
And
if New Zealand were to follow that submission
as urged by Fletcher Building, there would be the imposition of a due diligence
obligation.
So those are my submissions. Oh, sorry, the last point was that
I was looking for the Business New Zealand submission to review that
because Export New Zealand, for example, and
the Motor Industry Association had both referred to Business New Zealand's
submission, but that hasn't been published, I believe, on
the Parliament's website, and I'm not sure what the contents of that
submission say.
If this is a public process, that's a submission that should be
publicly available, so it's available for scrutiny.
So those are my submissions.
Thank you.
I'll take any questions.
Thank you, Peter. We'll look into the Business New Zealand submission because all
submissions should be publicly available.
They've been tabled and released, so it may be that it's an issue there,
but we'll look into that. Thank you.
It doesn't appear that we have any questions, but that is not a reflection of a
lack of interest. It is just that you have given us a really comprehensive
and well-thought-out submission.
So thank you so much for being part of this process.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Peter. We'll move on now to our next submitter, which is Retail New
Zealand.
And Retail New Zealand, we have got by the looks of it
Carolyn Young with us. Great.
Good morning, Carolyn. And we have-
Good morning. Good morning
... as usual to see you.
Nice to see you.
Yes, again.
Frequent flyer with us. We have 10 minutes with you, as you know.
Includes time for questions, and we'll hand over to you now.
Yeah, I'm running solo today, and the point person on the
Modern Slavery Bill is Denise actually, and she's on holiday.
So I'll do the best I can. I have had some involvement, but you'll have obviously
read our submission. I've got a few things I'm going to read through just to
highlight some areas that we have.
So look, we want to start by saying that Retail NZ and our members strongly
support the intent of the bill to strengthen protections against modern slavery,
such as forced labor, human trafficking and exploitation, as well as
improving accountability and transparency within the business operations and
supply chain.
Look, there's several parts of the legislation that we think need to be
strengthened and considered.
My understanding is this is a member bill.
We have-
Yep
... had some experience with a member bill that has passed
through Parliament and been enacted, and then there's been
some
difficult challenges around interpretation for the ministry that
is then regulating. And once you have
a member bill that's passed all the way through, the only way to correct the errors
is to actually
go back and make changes. So we would strongly recommend that with the
member bill, that whichever, whether it's Justice or
whoever's going to be regulating, I'm assuming it's Justice, that they actually
do some work before it gets passed through, so that it's
really clear some of the intent, because
nothing against a member that's putting it up, but actually the way in which it's
going to be interpreted is really important.
So we would recommend that in the first instance.
We also believe that it would be really useful to be a fast follower
and to be looking at the Australian model and looking at
what we can enhance and copy rather than
trying to jump ahead and go really, really quickly.
This is a significant piece of work for businesses to undertake, and to get
it right is going to be really important.
We think being able to evolve the legislation over
time, rather than try to do everything at once is really
useful. In a retail setting, the supply chain is really
complex for some businesses, especially those businesses with over $100
million turnover.
There are some really significant businesses that have got very high turnover, and
their supply chain is really extensive.
So the first things I just want to really pull out or tease out a little bit around
the
reporting obligations-We think that
having really strict reporting obligations in terms of the period that you report
on is not actually going to be workable for business.
Many businesses have different reporting financial years.
I've been a chief executive in three different businesses.
I had a 30 November reporting period, I've had a
31 December reporting period, and a 31st of March reporting period.
When you have different reporting periods to the accountability to government,
it's very hard to report for your financial
period and report for a second separate set of accounts.
So we're recommending that businesses should be able to report for their financial
period and provide that information within six months of their end of
financial year, that they stipulate their financial period, and they stick
to it. So we think that that's really important.
And we do think
that we should be aligned closely to the Australian model.
There's many Australasian businesses in New Zealand that
big brother is usually Australia.
Having aligned compliance and aligned
reporting statements would be really useful and we would
get more traction as we move forward.
We think that would be really beneficial for--
And that we could accept any statements made
by Australian companies could be the same replicated within the New Zealand
environment.
There is a piece we've highlighted in paragraph nine about allowing any
two or more related entities within the same corporate
group to submit a joint slavery statement.
A number of businesses will own more than one
retail entity, and it can become really complex to
separate out. They might be using the same supply chains and
all of those sorts of things for the different products that they have.
Would be really useful to be able to consolidate those, and we would ask that this
is considered.
Then if you think a little bit about businesses that are on the threshold of the
$100 million turnover, if they drop down to $80
million, do they then stop reporting?
Would you consider looking at a two- or three-year average period to ensure
that you're saying over any two-year period your average
turnover is over 100 million would make more sense to have.
And it might be a longer period, I'm not sure, but it's something that should be
considered because some businesses will flip in and out in terms of
that space, and then you'll get a lack of consistency in terms of
reporting and the work that needs to be done.
Then we just have some concerns around making sure that the reporting is
risk-based and proportionate to the seriousness of the incident or
complaint. That we focus on material instances that are
substantiated claims, they are key risk areas and systems used
to identify and investigate. So making sure that they're not suppositions,
but they're actually fact-based and we know that they've occurred,
versus reporting everything that's a possible.
If you think about the Privacy
Act, you report an actual breach, you don't report a suspected
breach. You have to investigate it, and if you don't breach it, you don't have to
report anything. So I think thinking about those sorts of things.
Then just thinking a little
bit about
how consolidated revenue would work for different
retail models, like a franchise model or a cooperative model, making
sure we're really clear that in a cooperative or a
franchise model, the businesses that run the
local retail store, they run it themselves.
That they are independently responsible, not the group
structure. So making sure that the legislation is worded really
clearly and articulately to make sure that we're not wrapping
up directors of a
franchisor that don't control what
a franchisee is actually doing, as an example, or in the cooperative model as well.
So we think that's a really important piece.
There's businesses like Shein and Temu that,
how are they going to be compliant?
How do we know that they meet the standards that we would
expect in New Zealand? And we think that's something that really should be
considered and addressed as to how that will continue through.
And I think just
before any further progress, I think the committees would be really worthwhile,
and we can arrange for someone to understand the complexities of supply
chain. Supply chain is really, really complex and so,
depending on the size of the business, you might be buying from a
supply chain person, but it might not be the manufacturer, it might not
be where the raw materials are. So really understanding how
far down you need to go and making sure that we're really clear in the
legislation about that.
And then
some
stores would have 50,000, 60,000, 70,000 SKUs.
This is a really significant piece of work.
So really making sure that we have adequate lead time to
ensure we have appropriate
reporting, and we believe that we'd need a minimum of 12 months lead time
from someone's financial year to be able to get something like this through.
These big businesses that have, you think thousands of SKUs like that, that is a
large piece of work that people are committed to doing.
And look, I think some statutory guidance would be good and some
templates. We know from some other legislation, it's really hard to get
interpretation. It's really hard to find out how to work things through.
With a recent member bill that passed through and has been enacted,
we have had great difficulty in getting in front of the
right people to actually be able to talk about the challenges that the
wording has now had on the interpretation that
theRegulating authority is now taken, even
though our members have had legal advice on how they should interpret
this stuff. So, be really important to make sure that we get
everything lined up in the right sort of way.
I know I'm short of time, so I'll leave it there.
But those are some highlights, there's more, but it's a really big piece of work,
and great that we're doing it. Let's just try and get it right.
Thank you so much, Carolyn, and really very helpful submission, so
appreciate it. We've got quite a few questions, but we've probably only got time
for one, and Pamjit's hand was up first.
So if you could make it quick, Pamjit, what's your-
Thank you. Thank you, Carolyn, for your submission.
The concern that you expressed about implementation of this policy and the
way you were expressing it, it seemed like you felt there can be many
unintended consequences of this. So can you elaborate on that?
What were the kind of thoughts going on there?
Well, I guess to expand on the example, the
gift card bill that was passed and enacted this year, we
had members that contacted us about some wording, how
it was going to be interpreted
in November, prior to the enactment in
March. It took the Commerce Commission five months to come back
to us, and they came back to us a week before enactment with how they were going to
interpret it, because it was very complex, because it wasn't clearly
written. And that gave our members one week
to
change their whole way of their retail promotions
because of how they were interpreting things, yet they had had legal
advice that interpreted it differently.
And then we couldn't get the Commerce Commission to come back to us, we couldn't
get MBIE to come back to us. We've reached out to the member whose member bill it
was. We haven't been able to meet with them.
We
were sent between that person and the minister, back to that person, back to the
minister, back to the person who saw it through Parliament, and we're still waiting
to see the minister. And so, once you've got an
issue that is not as it's intended to be, it's really
complex to get it right. So actually working really closely with the
regulatory authority, the ministry that's going to regulate it, I think is really
important to get that wording accurate, because this is really important that we do
this right. Thank you.
Thank you, Carolyn. That's a really good challenge for us as a committee, so we
really appreciate you making that point clear.
We have to move on now to our next submitter, but again, thank you for your written
and your oral submission, too, today.
Thank you.
Okay, now we have Oceania Freedom Network.
It looks like-
Hello
... Sarah Scott-Webb, welcome. We have 10 minutes-
Thank you
... with you. That includes time for questions. I'll hand over to you now.
Thank you. Tēnā koutou katoa, and thank you for the
opportunity to appear with you today.
My name is Sarah Scott-Webb. I lead the Oceania Freedom
Network. We are a coalition of civil society
organizations, practitioners, survivor advocates,
faith-based organizations, and frontline responders
working across Aotearoa New Zealand and the Pacific to prevent trafficking,
strengthen victim protection, and improve responses to modern
slavery and exploitation. We strongly support the bill
proceeding.
In my written submission on behalf of the Oceania Freedom
Network, I addressed mandatory human rights due diligence,
reporting thresholds, victim protections, and the Human
Rights Commission provisions. These were key areas that
came up in our network discussions, and I'm happy to answer
questions on any of these issues.
Today, however, I want to focus on a different question.
How will we know whether this legislation has been
successful?
For me, the answer is simple. The success of this bill
should not be measured by how many statements are published or how many
reports are filed. It should be measured by whether it improves
outcomes for people experiencing modern slavery and
exploitation.
We have the opportunity to learn from the strengths
and from the shortcomings of legislation that already exists
overseas, and I think the most important lesson for us
comes from Australia.
The statutory review of Australia's Modern Slavery Act found
that after more than three years, there was no hard
evidence that the legislation had produced meaningful change for
people experiencing modern slavery.
And that finding should give us
pause, because it raises a fundamental question.
What is the purpose of modern slavery legislation if it
does not positively impact the lives of those it is
intended to protect?
The Australian review triggered significant discussion about due
diligence, remediation, enforcement, oversight, and
those reforms matter.
But for New Zealand, I think the most important lesson we can take
from this review is much simpler.
The legislation in Australia was not producing meaningful
outcomes for victims, and that finding should
shape how we think about this bill.
Because ultimately, modern slavery legislation should be judged not
by the quality of reporting, but by whether it improves the
lives of people experiencing exploitation.
It's also important to remember that Australia entered
into the modern slavery legislation conversation with
something New Zealand currently lacks, a
nationally coordinated victim support program.
Their Support for Trafficked People program has operated for several
years, providing coordinated case management and
support for identified victims of trafficking and
slavery.New Zealand has no
equivalent system,
no national referral mechanism, no
nationally coordinated framework for victim identification and
referral,
no clear pathway for accommodation support or
any of the provisions listed in Section 21 of the
bill.
And if Australia is still grappling with how to
improve meaningful change for victims
despite having that infrastructure in place, New
Zealand cannot afford to overlook this gap from the
outset.
This bill rightly states that one of its primary purposes
is to increase support for victims of modern slavery.
I strongly support that objective,
but we need to acknowledge the reality that currently the systems
required to achieve that objective in New Zealand do not
exist.
I know some may view this bill primarily as a reporting
framework focused on large companies and overseas supply chains,
but this bill has a stated broader
purpose.
It is not only about reporting, it is also about
reducing modern slavery and increasing support for victims,
and there are three reasons why this matters.
First, while much of the discussion focuses on
overseas supply chains, exploitation also
occurs here in Aotearoa.
Migrant workers, for example, remain vulnerable to exploitation in
sectors such as horticulture, construction, hospitality,
and other labor-intensive industries.
As I note in my written submission, these sectors are often
dominated by small and medium-sized businesses, which is
one reason why I support a lower reporting threshold.
Second,
any legislation that increases awareness, scrutiny,
reporting, and due diligence is likely to result in
greater identification of exploitation.
That was the case in Australia and the United Kingdom following
implementation of their modern slavery legislation, and it's a
positive outcome.
But increased identification must be matched by
increased capacity to respond.
And third, if victim support is an explicit
purpose of this legislation, then it is entirely
appropriate to ask whether New Zealand has the systems in
place to deliver on that promise.
After more than 20 years working on trafficking and exploitation
issues, I've seen one lesson reinforced over and over
again, and that is that identifying exploitation
is only the beginning. The real test is what happens
next, whether a victim can access protection, support,
a pathway to justice and recovery, and at the moment, we
have a significant gap.
Too often, the burden falls on NGOs,
migrant support organizations, faith communities, unions,
and frontline practitioners operating with limited
resources.
As an example, just last week, one of our network
members contacted us after being notified of potential
trafficking victims needing accommodation, and the
questions we had were immediate. Well, who could help? Where could they go?
Who could support them?
Our network began making calls and reaching out through personal
contacts, trying to piece together a response.
Someone knew of a shelter that might be able to assist women,
but these victims were men. There's no
support in place. There's no referral pathway, no
coordinated response, no specialist service ready to step in,
and that is the problem.
Because when victims are identified, support should not
depend on who happens to know who. It
should not depend on whether NGOs can pull together an
informal response. There should be a clear
system for victim support, and at the moment, there
isn't.
And this is why I believe so strongly victim support and
protection must remain central to this
legislation and its implementation.
And the encouraging thing is, is that New Zealand already
has an opportunity to address this gap.
Minister Costello is leading work at the moment on a
new national action plan to address trafficking in persons, and
already victim protection has been identified there as a
key priority area. I encourage the committee
to see this bill and that work as
complementary,
because together they create an opportunity not only to
improve transparency and accountability, but to build
the systems needed to identify, refer,
protect, and support victims when exploitation is
found.
If we are serious about addressing modern slavery,
support for victims must be treated as essential
national infrastructure.
Transparency matters and reporting matters,
but a system that identifies victims without supporting them
is only doing half the job.
In closing, Australia's review found no
meaningful change for victims.
New Zealand has the opportunity to do better.
The success of this bill will not be measured by what
businesses report. It will be measured by what happens
to people.Thank you. I welcome any questions.
Thank you very much. We are actually at the end of our time with you, Sarah, but
thank you so much for your comprehensive submission.
We really appreciate it.
You're welcome.
And we'll move on now to our next submitter.
We have the Coal Action Murihiku, Jenny
Campbell. Hopefully, Jenny is there. Wonderful.
Jenny, if you could just turn your camera on and unmute yourself, and we have 10
minutes with you this morning. That includes time for questions.
Do take that into consideration, and we'll hand over to you now.
Kia ora koutou.
I'll just bring up what I want to say.
Lovely.
Kia ora.
This is our submission to the Modern Slavery
Bill. Kia ora koutou katoa. Ko Takitimu toku maunga.
Ko Wiremu toku ama. Ko Takitimu toku waka.
Ko Ngāi Tahu toku iwi. Ko Te Rohe Ā Rahā toku marae.
Nō Mossburn toku kāinga. Ko Jenny Campbell ahau.
The whakatauki which seems to apply at this moment, "Te
tiro whakamuri, ko kuri whakamua." Look
back and reflect so we can move forward.
I am co-convenor of Coal Action Murihiku, and I'm
speaking on as their representative, along with my personal perspectives.
We appreciate being able to add our perspectives to this enabling and social
justice-based proposed Modern Slavery Bill.
Members of CAM are very impressed that there is cross-party support in
Parliament for this Modern Slavery Bill, and you are treating it as a common
good bill, bound by the principles of social justice for all.
It is envisaged the principles contained in this bill will make life
bearable and offer true freedom for those who are being held in various
ways as slaves as we speak.
With a case in court at present, we are all very mindful of the fact
that extreme cases of slavery are still happening in Aotearoa.
This is an atrocious state of affairs and flies in the face of
principles which we in Aotearoa hold dear.
Once given freedom from slavery in all its forms, these people will be able to
make their own decisions without threats, abuse, shaming, and all
the other implications slavery entails.
They deserve to experience life in all its fullness without fear and
coercion. This is particularly true for young
people and children.
We, as CAM members, are very mindful of those employed in all mining
industries, and especially coal, both here and around the world,
especially related to teenagers and very young children.
It has had a bad reputation, especially around health and safety, over
many years in both underground and open cast situations,
with unions and society having worked hard to ensure these
situations have mostly been eliminated in
Aotearoa.
Now, with all the need for special precious metals such as
silicon being mined internationally, we have a
responsibility to ensure our imports are not related to
child or other forms of human labor.
We, as members of this society, all have a
responsibility to report any instances of suspected
slavery in any industry, large or small, in
community or in family situations.
We must all be compelled to ensure harm to others is stopped.
This bill will help prevent and address modern slavery and trafficking,
bringing freedom and hope for those released from these barbaric
situations. Unfortunately, most of the instances
of people being caught up in slavery are women and girls of all
ages, for example, in the sex industry, in
male-dominated industries where women are working, and
many homes, without us being astute enough to recognize it for
what it is.
People are powerless to leave because of threats,
coercion, fear, and lack of money.
Often, they feel unable to act as they are so humiliated and
feel helpless.
In Aotearoa, the issue of pay inequity is
a form of slavery, with women feeling inadequate and that they are
lesser beings because of lower wages.
What is this government
doing to change that situation in line with this bill?
In all of these disastrous situations, not only is the abused person
seriously affected, but so are their whanau, work
colleagues, friends, and our wider society.
The principles we listed in our written submission are the backbone of this
bill. They say, and we're adding
clauses to the aspects we're raising, A,
mandatory reporting on modern slavery risks must be for all
large and small organizations, including working in
industry situations such as, as well as
involuntary groups. B,
greater transparency for consumers and investors through the public
register.
C,
stronger support for survivors, adding, including
financial, emotional, and psychological support.
D, improved national data and accountability, adding,
with publication of perpetrators who have been put
through the court system, so acting as a deterrent.
These principles
encapsulate the essential means by which modern slavery can be recognized
across many fields. Once recognized, they can be dealt with by
empowering those in slavery conditions to be lifted out of these
situations.
Then they are able to live their own free lives through their release from this
bondage without recriminations.
We want to stress these aspects to add greater strength to this
bill.We stress our further recommendations
outlined in our written submission.
One, that companies large and small will not only be
required to report risks of modern slavery, but must also work
to actually prevent or address these risks.
We strongly believe that without this directive and subsequent action,
the bill will not achieve its purpose in preventing as well as
eradicating modern slavery.
Two, that this bill ensures, enables, and delivers real
change for people experiencing modern slavery in industrial and social
operations, and our supply chains both
internationally and here in Aotearoa.
Three, that the cross-party cooperation and goodwill around
this bill to date will be shown in ensuring this bill produces
positive ways forward to enable the end of modern slavery in all
its forms, especially in Aotearoa.
He iti, he pounamu. It may be small, but it is very precious.
Rangimarie. Kia ora koutou.
Thank you very much, Jenny. We really appreciate your perspective, particularly
from the mineral side of things, and how that plays into
this process.
We don't have any questions for you this morning, but that is not a reflection of a
lack of interest, a really comprehensive submission, so thank you.
Kia ora koutou.
We'll move on-
Thank you for the
chance to speak. Kia ora koutou.
Thank you.
Kia ora.
We'll move on now to our next speaker.
We have Trade Aid. We've got Dennis Parker, Daniel Fielding, and
Brittney Halligan.
They look all ready to go.
Love that. Welcome back, Daniel, to Dennis, and Brittney.
We have 10 minutes with you. That does include time for questions.
You can take the submission itself as read, but please feel free to highlight
what you want us to be drawn to.
Okay, and thank you very much for the opportunity.
My name is Dennis Parker. I'm the CEO of Trade Aid Importers
Limited. With me today is Daniel Fielding, a volunteer, and
assisting us
for our submission, and Brittney Halligan, our brand and
communications manager.
We at Trade Aid strongly welcome the introduction of the Modern Slavery Bill.
The introduction has been long awaited, and we want to thank those who have put in
the extraordinary mahi to get the bill to this stage.
As an organization that has pioneered fair trade in Aotearoa, New Zealand for
over 52 years, we see this legislation as a vital
step towards transparency.
However, our practical experience navigating
slavery-free global supply chains tells us that in its current
form, this is a disclosure-only framework that lacks the
teeth required to drive real systemic change.
Without critical amendments, this bill risks becoming a paper-shuffling,
box-ticking exercise that leaves New Zealand falling behind global
leaders like the UK, Australia, and the European
Union. Here in New Zealand, we pride ourselves on being
leaders of positive systemic change, and we need a
robust bill that reflects those values.
To ensure this legislation genuinely protects vulnerable workers both here
and overseas, and creates a level playing field for
responsible New Zealand businesses, we urge the committee to
consider four essential amendments, and I'll hand over to
Daniel to take you through the details of those recommendations.
Thank you.
Thanks, Dennis. As Dennis said, to give this bill the
teeth it needs, Trade Aid proposes four essential amendments.
And first is the introduction of mandatory due diligence.
So we must shift the legal requirement from simply reporting on slavery
to actively identifying, mitigating, and remedying the
harm. Two, lowering the reporting threshold
to 20 million. The current 100 million threshold
catches just 263 companies, leaving 99% of the
market completely unmonitored. So dropping the threshold to 20
million
will bring in, by our estimates, the top sort of 1%
of earners, so capturing more of the medium to large entities that
actually drive our nation's 7.9 billion annual spend
in the high-risk import area.
Three, establish a standalone independent Anti-Slavery
Commissioner. We need to create a permanent statutory
watchdog at arm's length from political influence
to enforce compliance and support victims.
And four,
implement meaningful proportional penalties.
We recommend replacing the flat $600,000 fine with
a penalty of up to 10% of global turnover for a
multinational
corporation. A static fine is
simply manageable and could be seen as sort of just a cost of
doing business. So those are the four.
I'll hand over to Brittney now to speak about the market reality and the people
behind this submission.
Thank you, Daniel.
We ask for these amendments today, not just as a single organization,
but on behalf of a massive movement.
We are advocating today for Trade Aid, for our over
500,000 international fair trade farmers and artisans, for
our over 1,200 fair trade supporting New Zealand business partners,
and for the individual New Zealand consumers who directly support fair trade.
At the heart of our submission is a simple truth.
Workers both here in Aotearoa, New Zealand, and across our global
supply chains deserve to be protected.
They deserve to work with dignity, free from exploitation, and under
a robust law that prioritizes ensuring their safety.
Trade Aid's 52 years in the market prove that slavery-free procurement is not
just a moral obligation, but a viable business model.
New Zealand consumers deserve transparency, and they're demanding it.
They want to know that the businesses that they support are not hiding behind
box-ticking exercisesWe understand that you have a
significant task ahead of you with many perspectives to consider, and we want
to thank you for your mahi in helping to further strengthen, define,
and add real power to this bill.
We welcome your questions.
Thank you very much.
Camilla Belch, first question from you. Thanks.
And thank you very much for your submission and for your ongoing work
in this area for over a number of years.
I was thinking about how when I was 15, I volunteered for Trade
Aid during my bronze Duke of Edinburgh, so
certainly an important introduction to
ethical trade for many people. I just had a question around,
and thank you for your really clear recommendations, and some of those have been
echoed by other submitters. But I just wanted to focus on the threshold
change that you have recommended.
Obviously, at the moment, we have 100
million turnover and I think you've suggested 20
million. And I just wanted to ask you in terms of
picking that number as opposed to 50, and whether in your
view there
would be a benefit in possibly if there was an
appetite for that threshold moving down over time, or whether you think it's
important to set it at a particular rate and kind of keep it at that rate-
Mm-hmm
... over a longer period. Just kind of wondering in terms of
the fact that we have no reporting at the moment, what your views are on that
threshold.
Thanks for your question, Camilla.
The 20 million threshold is a historic stance that Trade Aid has always taken.
But also, when we look at the New Zealand economy and we
apply that $100 million threshold to New Zealand businesses,
there's only 263 that fall into the reporting
threshold. And of that, I believe only three of them are operating
in high-risk sectors. So we bring in a massive
$7.9 billion worth of product that is associated with
modern slavery.
And the reality is that that is not all coming from those three
companies. It's coming from companies who are spending 20 million and above.
As to whether we think it should be reviewed, yes, definitely.
I think the three-year review framework is fantastic, but I
also think we should start as we mean to continue.
I hope that answers your question.
Dennis and Daniel, do you have anything further to add?
Nothing from me.
No, that's good.
Yeah.
Beautiful. Thank you very much for your contribution to this process
and the really helpful recommendations.
It's great for our committee
to work from. Thank you for being here this morning.
Thank you.
We'll move on now to our next submitter,
hopefully. We have got Professor Gail
Pacheco Riddy, representing Te
Kāhui Tika Tangata Human Rights Commission.
Beautiful, I see there.
Professor, thank you.
Lovely. We have 10 minutes with you this morning, and that does include time
for questions.
Kia ora. Can you hear me well?
Yes, thank you.
Cool. Well, first, tena koutou katoa.
Thank you for the opportunity to present today.
My name is Gail Pacheco, as said. I'm the Equal Employment Opportunities
Commissioner at the New Zealand Human Rights Commission, Te Kāhui
Tika Tangata.
And I'm joined hopefully by my senior advisor, Oliver
Cristella.
Morena katoa.
Thanks, Oliver. I'd like to begin by stating that the commission
strongly supports modern slavery legislation and
welcomes the proposed bill.
Effective modern slavery legislation enhances freedoms, including the
freedom to live with dignity and to be free from abuse and
exploitation.
The bill is therefore an important step towards strengthening human rights
protections and addressing exploitation both
domestically and across global supply chains.
Importantly, this bill creates an opportunity for New Zealand to align
itself with evolving international expectations around
responsible business conduct and human rights.
And this alignment matters not only for protecting people,
but also for maintaining New Zealand's credibility internationally.
While we've made a broad range of recommendations in our written
submission, today I just want to focus on three areas of the bill that could
be strengthened
and where the commission is uniquely placed to add value to the
committee's important work.
So first, mandatory due diligence.
At present, the bill largely focuses on reporting obligations.
Reporting is important,
but the international evidence and reviews
demonstrate that reporting requirements without
accompanying due diligence obligations have not delivered
significant human rights improvements for people experiencing modern
slavery.
The European Union has already put in place mandatory due
diligence framework, and major reviews in both
Australia
and the UK have recommended strengthening their legislative frameworks to
include mandatory due diligence.
Inclusion of this in the bill would require businesses to not
only identify and disclose risks,
but to take reasonable steps to actively prevent, mitigate, and
remediate harm.
And this inclusion would also ensure alignment with the International Human Rights
Framework and thus permit New Zealand entities to
operationalize their responsibilities under the United
Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human
Rights.This is widely regarded as the
authoritative global standard for business and human rights.
Now, if I put my economist hat on as well,
then I must emphasize that given mandatory due diligence
is rapidly becoming the international benchmark for responsible
business practice, then aligning New Zealand's framework with
these developments would reduce regulatory fragmentation
and compliance costs for New Zealand firms who are operating internationally,
while also strengthening their competitiveness in global markets.
And it would support our commitments under the New Zealand-UK Free Trade
Agreement and further reinforce New Zealand's reputation,
something which I think is particularly important for an export-driven
economy such as ourselves.
The second key recommendation I'd like to elaborate on is
a committee embedding survivor voice in decision-making.
So key human rights principles emphasize survivor's
rights to meaningful and active participation in
decision-making processes,
which affect the enjoyment of their rights.
The bill currently does not have a mechanism to ensure participation
of survivors of modern slavery.
We therefore strongly encourage the bill to provide for the
establishment of a parliamentary
modern slavery committee. This would be composed of
non-executive members of Parliament, and similar to that
established under Schedule 1 of the New South Wales
Modern Slavery Act 2018.
So a key strength of that New South Wales committee has been that it's
been utilizing those survivor voices to inform its work,
which has enabled a deeper and more nuanced understanding
of modern slavery, particularly what it looks like in the domestic
context.
The third and final area I'd like to focus
on is the role of the Human Rights Commission.
So first up, the commission welcomes the opportunity to play a strong
role in addressing modern slavery and is open to hosting a
human rights commissioner with this responsibility or having
modern slavery included as a priority
area within the scope of the Equal Employment Opportunities
Commissioner.
However, we do have a few suggestions to better align the bill with our
statutory mandate, as well as our international
obligations.
If the commission's mandate is extended, the bill should
ensure that the commission retains
discretion consistent with its independence over
how it undertakes this work.
The appointment process for any commissioner should follow the standard
process for human rights commissioners,
and there should be a consequential amendment to the Human Rights Act,
which would preserve flexibility to appoint an additional
commissioner.
Also, if the commission is to take on this expanded role, this must
be accompanied by sustained and proportionate
baseline funding.
Where new responsibilities are placed on a national human rights
institution, they have to be matched with adequate funding.
Without this, there's a real risk of undermining the
effectiveness of the new function,
as well as the commission's broader work, and it risks affecting our
A status as a national human rights institution, which would
affect New Zealand's international reputation with respect to
human rights.
So in conclusion,
we commend the constructive work undertaken by
parliamentarians to introduce this bill, which seeks to
strengthen human rights protections in our law. Thank you.
The commission supports the bill.
It encourages strengthening it to ensure impact,
and this includes the full range of recommendations in our written
submission and the three key areas that I've
focused on today. So embedding mandatory due
diligence, enabling meaningful survivor
participation through a parliamentary committee,
and safeguarding the commission's independence and resourcing
if it is to take a greater role in this work.
Such an approach will better align the bill with human rights best
practice. It would enhance freedom and deliver
stronger protection against modern slavery,
both domestically and in our international supply chains.
So thank you again for the opportunity to present today, and Oliver and
I are happy to answer any questions that the committee may have.
Thank you both, and thank you for just acknowledging your
openness to including
modern slavery within the Human Rights Commission.
I will hand over to a question to Camilla, and you've got a couple of minutes,
so don't rush. I'm just going to go grab my child. Won't be a moment.
Thanks very much,
Gail and Oliver, for your submission, and thanks for the
openness to the Human Rights Commission for considering this as part of your
work, which I know Greg has also been very grateful for your
engagement on this. I'm interested to hear about the
committee in New South Wales that you mentioned,
and how that would work possibly in New Zealand context.
So,
you said that that would be
non-executive MPs. What's kind of the ongoing work program and
how long has that committee been set up for?
Or any other ways that you could see that that would be good to
have in New Zealand?
Olga, do you want to take that one?
Yeah, no problem. Yeah, thanks for that, Camilla, and
thanks everyone for having us. Essentially, we became aware of this committee when
we were engaging with the New South Wales Anti-Slavery Commissioner, and I know he
may have made a submission on this bill.
And he had said to us that one of the things that he had thought that had been
really valuable, both for, I think, the members of Parliament
in New South Wales and also for the communities, was having the parliamentary
select committee for educating members of Parliament and also sort of taking
some of this work that can feel like it sits up in the clouds a little bit and
making it meaningful.
The specific work program that I'm aware of
is referred to in a written submission, but essentially in
2024, the committee established an inquiry into temporary
migrant exploitation, and I had an opportunity to look at some of the evidence that
was given in preparing for the submission.
And I noticed there was at least, I think, four or five
submissions made from people who had actually experienced modern slavery
from a survivor perspective. I'm talking about, I think there was one from a
blueberry worker, people who had worked in agricultural
and in the rural
workers. And I saw, I suppose this was one of the ways it allowed
MPs and the public at large to engage with
survivors of modern slavery and to understand really that experience, particularly
in a domestic context. And from a human rights perspective, it's really
important that
work that has been done at a parliamentary level incorporates
survivor voice.
And I think it provided other benefits from the educational and
deepening understanding perspective for MPs.
And I think what he said to us is both himself, practitioners, but
also MPs across the sort of House had really appreciated
and enjoyed the involvement.
Thank you both. Really appreciate that
submission, both written and oral as well.
Really helpful to us working through this process going
forward.
We'll move on now to our next submitter, and I'm sure we'll be in touch soon, no
doubt.
Thank you both.
Thank you.
Thank you all.
We have our next submitter, Community Law Center Aotearoa,
Karen Hodgson and Dylan Nightingale.
Welcome. We have 10 minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions. We'll hand over to you now.
Tena koe, Madam Chairperson, and tena koutou members of the committee.
Thank you for this opportunity. I'm called Karen Hodgson.
Kia ora. Ko Dylan Nightingale
toku
ingoa. So over six years at Community Law Wellington and Hutt Valley,
I've represented over 80 clients in migrant exploitation cases.
And that frontline experience has led to me publishing a Borrin
Foundation research
this year on ways of holding exploiting employers more accountable.
And I've also set up a charity called Very Me, which has
free multilingual information on its website and a free
evidence-gathering app, including time recording tool based on GPS
data.Just
a
quick bit of
context around the cases that we see at
Community Law in Wellington and Hutt Valley.
So the committee will be aware that census data says that approximately 30%
of New Zealand's population is born overseas.
20% of our current population identifies as either Asian, Middle
Eastern, Latin American, or African.
And at any one time, there are approximately 600,000 migrants in New
Zealand.
MBIE's 2025 Employment Monitor found that a quarter of migrant
workers remain at risk of exploitation, and 15%
are described as knowledgeable but trapped.
So they know they're being exploited, but they cannot leave.
Complaints to MBIE have tripled from about 800 in
2022/2023 to over 2,400 in
2024 to '25.
And 12% of those on work or student visas have reported being paid
below the minimum wage. But we know that that is just a fraction of
what is actually happening out there.
Nobody knows the true statistics as there is significant
under-reporting. The Ministerial Advisory Group on Transnational Serious and
Organized Crime, in a report last year, said that there are almost
certainly exploited migrants in our horticulture, construction, beauty services,
and hospitality sectors, and those are the sectors that
we see most often in terms of the clients that come to us.
So exploitation
starts as visa dependency, immigration coercion, excessive
hours, underpayment, and it escalates from there.
If we wait until it looks like modern slavery, we have waited too
long. And I'd like to give you an example
of
a real case.
So a migrant worker who was on an accredited employer work visa was working
in a convenience store in a small rural town.
They paid a premium offshore to secure that job.
This was money borrowed from family back home, and money that they were
counting on being able to repay once they were earning New Zealand
wages. When they arrived, the reality was nothing like what they had been
promised. The roster said 35 hours a week.
They were working 90 hours from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
seven days.
Every week, they were required to go to a local ATM and take
out $300 in cash and give that back to their employer.
The time sheets were false, and the underpayment was severe and systematic.
They wanted to leave, but they couldn't. The visa was tied to the employer.
They were in debt from the premium they had paid, and they
had no realistic way to repay what they owed if they walked out.
So this is not someone being held in chains, but it is someone who is
completely trapped, and that is modern slavery.
So what did people see around them?
Well, a bread delivery driver came to that store most evenings.
A milk delivery driver came most mornings, and fruit and veggie
suppliers dropped off stock regularly.
They saw the same person there every single time they came,
early morning till evening, seven days a week.
So under this bill, does any of that trigger anything?
Well, in one scenario, absolutely nothing.
The delivery drivers might simply think that that person works a lot of hours.
And even if they are aware of modern slavery law, they may think, "Well, this
person isn't a slave. They're not being held against their will.
They're just standing behind a counter. They seem fine.
This is an employment issue. It is not modern slavery."
So that instinct to file this away as just an employment issue
is a critical gap that this bill needs to close.
Because that dismissal is exactly what this bill's high threshold enables.
If people only look for chains and locked doors, everything else goes
unchecked. Exploitation presents as patterns.
The same person, never a day off, no breaks.
These are all invisible indicators.
The problem is not that people are not seeing them.
The problem is that without clear guidance, people don't know what they are
seeing or feel they can't act unless they're certain it meets some
legal threshold they don't fully understand.
This bill presents an important opportunity to change that, not just
through reporting obligations, but through a public awareness campaign that
teaches people to recognize the full spectrum and tells them
clearly, "You don't need to be certain it's modern slavery.
If something doesn't look right, say something."
The delivery drivers, the customers, the neighboring businesses, they are all
potential eyes and ears, but only if the bill and the awareness
campaign around it equips everyone to act.
Because this kind of exploitation is happening in every community in New Zealand,
in our takeaway shops, beauty salons, construction sites, orchards, bars, and
cafes. It is not rare, and it is not hidden.
It is just not being recognized. And as Karen said, this
needs to be victim safe. So if those delivery drivers report
their concerns to their managers, what happens next?
Well, under the bill as currently drafted, that is not well worked through.
And for this worker, a poorly managed report could be catastrophic.
Their employer finding out that they have been reported could put them at serious
risk, not only of jeopardizing their visa, but they could face
pressure, threats, and worse.
So any information that is reported must be handled with the victim's safety at the
center, and that means before sensitive information reaches
anyone who could identify the worker, their safety must be assessed
and secured.
People who are approaching that worker must be trained to do that
in a way that does not expose them to further harm.
The worker must be presented with options in their own language and plain terms.
They need to know, if you want to leave, here is how you will be
supported. Here is what a protection visa looks like, and here is
who will help you find somewhere to stay and another
job.Communications from MB must clearly
state that workers will not be penalized for visa breaches that result from
exploitation.
There is a migrant exploitation protection visa.
It's only for six months, and that is not long enough to find alternative
employment, stabilize, and rebuild after trauma.
It should be at least 12 months, which is what it originally was.
We also need more community-based navigation services, trusted
people embedded in communities who can reach that store worker
and support them.
Legal aid should be extended to cover MEPB applications.
So all of this has to be thought through very carefully.
One of the biggest barriers I've documented is evidence.
In this situation, as in most others I have worked in, the
employer holds all the records and they
are all false. They're fabricated after the event,
and it becomes very difficult for the worker to prove
the wage theft that has taken place.
So just bringing it back to the bill.
So as Karen said,
in our submission, we talk about
some definitional issues we've identified and due diligence gaps.
So the convenience store worker situation, the systemic
underpayment over months,
false time sheets, and cash paybacks from wages
would likely constitute a serious violation of legislation relating to
employee rights and therefore would be captured by the
bill's definition of forced or exploitative labor.
So that worker is probably in scope, but there are still risks in not
explicitly linking the definition to sections
351 and 351A of the Immigration Act.
So those sections, in our submission, should be referenced in the
definition of modern slavery in paragraph A.
And then the bill's serious violation
threshold
has no guidance.
And without it, reporting entities will make their own judgment calls,
and it is quite likely they will set that bar too high.
And finally,
yes, so even where conduct such as the store
worker, it might technically be captured,
not naming sections 351 and 351A of the
Immigration Act signals to reporting entities that
immigration-based coercion is peripheral to modern
slavery. If it is not named, it will not be looked
for.
And finally, on due diligence,
a supplier to that convenience store may be required to
report on its supply chain, but reporting is not the
same as investigating it.
So without a mandatory due diligence obligation, an entity can look superficially,
find no clearly labeled instance, and be satisfied that the bill's
requirements are met. The law should not simply
accept that an entity does not know.
It should ask, "Did you take reasonable steps to find out?" That is a very
different obligation, and right now the bill does not require it. Bye.
Thank you both for your submission.
We've gone well over time with you this morning, but really appreciate how
comprehensive your submission has been for us.
Really helpful for our process, so thank you.
Thank you.
Committee, we're going to move into full committee.
You've got the link for that.
The time for that is already listed.
So we'll see you in there
about 10 minutes.